# Emeraude Engine

## Introduction

Emeraude is an open-source 3D world engine written in C++20. It uses Vulkan for the graphics, OpenAL for the sound and a home solution for scene management and physics. This project is educative. There is no final goal yet, except making a 3D environment to play with and to evolve from scratch with the algorithms linked to 3D scenery. This is the 6th form of the engine.

This project is written on Debian with QtCreator using CMake.

NOTE : Libraries and tools version are the used ones at time of writing (2022/03/11).

## Cross-platform tools

- CMake >= 3.27.0
- QtCreator >= 10.0.2 (Optional)
- CLion >= 2023.3.2 (Optional)
 
## Dependent Libraries

- Vulkan >= 1.3.250
- GLSLang >= 13.0.0
- OpenAL >= 1.23.1
- GLFW >= 3.3.8
- ASIO >= 1.22.1
- JsonCPP >= 1.9.5
- ZLIB >= 1.2.13
- JPEG >= 2.1.5
- PNG >= 1.6.40
- FreeType >= 2.13.2
- SNDFile >= 1.2.2
- SampleRate >= 0.2.2
- Taglib >= 1.13.1 (Optional)
- ImGUI >= 1.89.6 (Optional)
- GLM >= 0.9.9.8 (Optional)
- Eigen >= 3.4.0 (Optional)

NOTE : On Debian-like linux platform there is a script to install dependencies via APT automatically.

## Project configuration for Linux (Debian-like)

Steps are based on a Debian-like system. Normally, it can be reproduced with some modifications on others distros. 
Just skip the line 'setup-debian' for other system. Installs tools and dependencies manually.

### Platform-specific tools

- Ninja-build >= 1.11.1
- GCC >= 13.2 or Clang >= 16.0

### Setup for development

These command lines will ask for sudo password in order to install dev packages from official debian repository.

Feel free to open 'setup-debian' script before launching the command.

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules git@bitbucket.org:londnoir/emeraude-engine.git
cd emeraude-engine
./tools/linux/setup-debian
./install
cd ..
```

## Project configuration for Windows

This project is intended to be compatible with Windows compilation through MinGW.
A compilation has been successfully done once, but nothing more since. 

## Project configuration for macOS

This project is intended to be compatible with macOS compilation through Clang.
A compilation has been successfully done once, but nothing more since.

Installs tools and libraries with :

```
brew install python cmake pkgconfig ninja libomp jpeg-turbo freetype libsndfile libsamplerate hwloc
```

# Engine todo-list

## General bugs and improvements
- Check for light coherence, create a built-in scene with a fixed directional light and multiple materials.
- Unloading objets from the scene do not release vulkan memory.

## Libraries
- Add RLE compression to the Targa image format.
- OBJ adds the write process.
- Finish the native format.
- Remove old MDx 3D format.

## Resources management
- Merge Font from PixelFactory and FontResource.
- Check for JSON resource the direct data description.
- Check for JSON resource the store resource addition.
- Set the source to the resource trait to be able to reset/reload the data from scratch.
- Add a hint to make some resource to leave intermediate data (sound -> OpenAL or images -> GPU).

## Scene :
- Create a shared dynamic uniform buffer for static entities instead using push_constants as they normally won't move between frame. Thus, it will only hold the model matrix.
- Check enable/disable audio on scene switching. (Shared with AUDIO section)

## Materials :
- Create a shared dynamic uniform buffer when a material do not use sampler. Pay attention to the real benefit of that solution.
- Create a material editor in javascript (application side).

## Rendering :
- Enable additional render targets next to the main one in order to create shadow maps, 2D textures and reflections.
- Study and create the cubemap rendering (single-pass) in order to be able to produce reflections and shadow cubemap.
- Improve the rendering branches to reduce rendering calls cost.
- Check sprite blending.
- Check sprite texture clamping to edges.
- Add post-processing effects.
- Add multisample rendering.

## Audio :
- Stop sounds from an inactive scene. (Shared with SCENE section)

## Shaders generation :


## Lighting :
- Fix the ambient light update against render target which use it.
- Re-enable the ambient light color generated by the averaging active lights color.
- Check the ambient light color generated by a texture.
- Check what is the use of the light matrix for shadow map and how to update it. Hint, this is MVP matrix from the light point of view.
- Check the light radius against renderable objects to discard some rendering calls.
- Split the light code generation by type to optimize shader binary and discard correctly a pixel once !

## Physics engine :
- Add the rotational physics.

## Animations :
- Check all animatable properties for all objects.
- Check overall animation system.

## Overlay :
- Rework the composable overlay to create native menu.
- Check the TextWriter class.

## GENERAL VULKAN :
- Read settings when generating samplers for texture.
- Finish 1D and 3D textures.
- Check validation layers and debug messenger relationship. (According to khronos, this is valid to create the debug messenger without validation layers)
- Fix texture loading. (UINT->UNORM) Convert data before ? or not ?
- Use of separated image from sampler in GLSL when useful.
- Find a better solutions to handle shared uniform buffer objects.
- Find a better way to create and store descriptor set layout.
- Find a way to order the rendering by pipeline layout to reduce the binding cost per draw.
- Check for the right way to push constant from the right shader declaration to right stage in vulkan. (GraphicsShaderGenerator.cpp:254)
- Check waitIdle() for device in every corner of the engine. Sometimes the device is lost.
